ok today we're going to talk about
changing the gas valve on a water heater
although this is a relatively simple
task I'll be first and foremost with
safety this is a test that I recommend
by a certified technician and not
necessarily by the homeowner but we will
walk through the steps of what is
necessary this to educate you and to
make it helpful for you when you do call
your certified technician out first
thing we do is safety safety is first
with this we shut the gas off at the gas
valve external gas valve that's past the
gas valve that runs the water heater
there's a redundant gas valve here it's
called a gas caulk we shut this into the
off position if it's 90 degrees from the
pipe it's in the off position as you can
see this one forms a tee against the
pipe that means it's off what this does
is it shuts the gas flow off to the unit
which eliminates the pilot light and
shuts it down completely now remember
that when you're coming into something
like this you're also typically dealing
with a whole lot of hot water that has a
potential of being a scald hazard that
you need to be aware of so the first
thing you want to do have to shut your
gas off is go ahead and hook your hose
up to the drain valve now before you
shut any valves off anywhere else you go
ahead and you get your screwdriver and
you this one has this particular kind of
a valve that's a screwdriver valve what
you do is you get in there and you
commits to twisting and you let some of
the sediment out of the water heater
while you're doing this because it'll
create kind of a double process for you
and it also blows the valve out so it
won't plug up with other garbage that
may be in the bottom of your water
heater before you shut your water off
after you've got that you've got a nice
flow of water you go ahead you come to
the top of the tank and on your cold
water side do I have a cold water
shut-off and you simply take this as a
90 degree valve and turn 90 degrees from
the valve this shuts the water flow off
coming in to the unit if your your unit
doesn't have one of these you need to
call a certified guy to come out and put
one on for you because this is a safety
feature that you need to have installed
the next step that you do here after
your tank is empty is remove the cover
make sure that this is all cool enough
for you to work with
if it's not stopped wait a while let it
cool off the next thing that we do is
get our crescent wrench and we
disconnect the lines below there are
three separate lines one a pilot line
the next a gas the main gas line the
third is the thermocouple which is a
sensor that lets the unit know that it's
proving flame and that it's okay to go
ahead and turn on the big flame it's
just one that works off of the pilot
itself so what you do is you remove all
three remembering that the center one
especially if it's on a propane will be
reverse-thread so you will have to spin
it the other direction as opposed to the
standard on/off direction so be aware of
that because you can mess the gas valve
up and and other things once again if
you're not comfortable with this you
should get a certified technician out
after we get those three lines removed
we come over we remove our gas line
that's hooked in by simply threading
this off remember our gas is off now so
there's no hazard in this and with all
of that removed these are tough too
tough to get out it's not real real easy
and you have the potential of bending
and breaking things if you don't really
know what you're doing so basically you
get a really big wrench you go across
the top of it make sure it's tight
enough that it's not going to hurt
anything and you just spin it off you
thread it out and after you're done
threading it out remember the tank is
empty you look in there to see if
there's any kind of big sediment buildup
if there is it's strongly recommended
that you think about replacing the water
heater itself a good recommendation is
if there is a problem with the gas valve
it's a good idea to think about
replacing the whole tank itself but
these are pieces and parts that can be
switched out now what we do is just
rethread the new one in
it'll thread in and clockwise manner
what you do is you get it hand tight and
then you go ahead and give it another
spin around don't get it super super
tight in there because it's some
that will tear up if you get it super
tight in there plus you can crush the
valve and many different things that you
can do if you do this once again I'd
recommend that you get a certified guy
into to do this and then you simply hook
the thermocouple back in hook your main
tubing actually you hook your main tube
in first because it's the biggest and
easiest to get a wrench on when you do
that and then you hook the thermocouple
and then you hook your pilot tube in and
then go ahead you install reinstall your
nipple that you pulled out of the other
one before you got done you tighten this
in and this is a flare fitting there
should be no teflon tape or pipe dope on
this fitting that's a flare fitting when
I say flare you can see how it's combed
out and how the inside of that is combed
in those just set against each other and
just just the metal itself is what sets
it up so what you do is you get it to
where it's snug with your hand then you
take your wrench and as you'll watch
you'll see this tighten then you'll
watch this start to spin then you stop
so here we go that's tight enough you
don't need to make that any tighter that
won't leak it's a good idea to always
double check yourself with soap bubbles
when you're done doing this just to make
sure that you have no gas leaks at all
and if you do call your certified
technician shut your gas back off to
finish this up you turn the gas on and
you're ready to light your pilot light
you have your doors off so it's time to
light the pilot light